=head1 NAME

Chess::Position::Move - Move Object for Chess::Position

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    my $move = Chess::Position::Move->new("e7d8q");
    my $from = $move->from;
    my $to = $move->to;
    my $promote = $move->promote;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The class L<Chess::Position::Move> can represent a chess move.

=head1 CONSTRUCTORS

=over 4

=item B<new(NOTATION[, POSITION])

Parses the string B<NOTATION> which can be a variety of move notations:

=over 8

=item I<Coordinate Notation>

Coordinate notation is the concatenation of the starting square (from) and the
destination square (to) optionally followed by a promotion piece: "q" for
a queen, "r" for a rook, "b" for a bishop, or "n" for a knight.  Case is
ignored for this notation.

For castling moves, give the start and destination squares for the king:
"e1g1", "e1c1", "e8b8", or "e8c8".

Examples: "e2e4", "c2b1q", "e8c8".

=item I<Standard Algebraic Notation - SAN>

The standard algebraic notation is the well-known standard short notation for
chess move in English.  It is case-sensitive! I<Reason>: A leading "B/b" is
ambiguous because it can be a square on the "b" file or stand for a bishop.
For example "B1c2" would mean that a bishop is moving from the 1-rank to "c2",
wherease "b1c2" would be coordinate notation for a piece moving from "b1" to
"c2". Except for pathological cases this ambiguity could be resolved by
inspecting the position but this has not been implemented.

You have to pass a L<Chess::Position> object as the second argument, if the
move is not specified unambiguously.

The parser is quite forgiving and may successfully parse moves that do not
strictly adhere to the standard but you should not rely on that.

=item I<

=back

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2021 Guido Flohr <guido.flohr@cantanea.com>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Chess::Position>, perl(1)
